---
layout: post
title: 2019 AGM
image: "/uploads/20171005_202215-1.jpg"
tags: []

---
Our 2019 Annual General Meeting will be held at [Makespace Oxford](https://www.google.co.uk/maps/place/Makespace+Oxford,+1+Aristotle+Ln,+Oxford+OX2+6TP/@51.7678439,-1.2695815,14z/data=!4m2!3m1!1s0x4876c5289f7ffc31:0x6ffe5c7df19aa5b) (Aristotle Lane) on 30th September 2019 between 7-9pm.

This is an exciting time for OCLT. We are transitioning to having a real project on the ground which shows how, by extracting land from the open market and holding it in trust, we can provide permanently and genuinely affordable homes for local people, thus building genuine community.  
  
Sustainability is the name of the game: social, environmental and financial. We plan to use this project to demonstrate the power of this community-owned and led model in the belief that there are many people out there, landowners AND local people in housing need, who will wish to join us in growing the sector over the next ten years.  
  
We have pipeline of future projects and potential new partners which will help with this transition.   
  
So come and join us…we welcome existing and new members. Help us grow this alternative model of housing provision in order to ensure the continued security of our city and county.  
   
The photo above was taken at a recent Board meeting where we were planning strategy to 2025.

**Want to become a Director of OCLT?**  
  
To join our merry band of housing boffins all you have to do is get another member to propose you to the board. Applications will be checked before the AGM to make sure candidates meet our criteria and then it will be put to a vote on the evening of the AGM. Reply to this email if you have any questions.  
  
[Sound good? You can fill out the application here](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1d6MH8fngF3k6fFJAPlm6D5X-MpUzEHCM)  
   
See you on September 30th!